I used to get this feeling that the
field of AI was just going so fast that
there's no way I could possibly keep up
with it. That it seemed like AI would be
replacing humans left and right in no
time. And part of this came from hearing
claims on social media, everything from
Zuckerberg claiming Meta will have
mid-level AI engineers by the end of
2025 to the globs of YouTubers that seem
to think, or at least want you to think,
that every new tweet from Sam Alman
means that AGI is imminent. But perhaps
even more than all that, what made me
feel that way was how I would constantly
hear about this benchmark or that
benchmark being surpassed by AI. At
first with GPD4, it was the SAT, AP
tests, the LSAT. Soon after that, it was
solving medium and hard programming
problems on leak code. And now it's
solving PhD level math and physics
questions. And I think for anyone to see
that, the announcements about AI
breakthroughs and the claims about
superhuman level performance, it does
make you pause. It makes you question
whether AI is really about to start
replacing humans in many high-skll
industries. And the reason I'm making
this video is to tell you that this idea
of AGI that big tech companies and many
AI influencers have sold you on is a
lie. It's AI is still fairly
far off from being comparable to human
intelligence. And in at least one key
way, it's not even headed in the right
direction. How could that be? How could
I claim that we're not even headed in
the right direction when AI can
outperform humans on such a wide variety
of tasks? Well, it comes down to how we
measure progress with benchmarks and how
those benchmarks influence the direction
of research. Because not a single
popular benchmark for LMS out there that
I know of actually measures
intelligence. And that's because
intelligence is not a measure of how
many tasks you can do. This is the
definition of intelligence, the ability
to acquire and apply knowledge and
skills. Every benchmark out there tests
the ability of a model to apply
knowledge. That part's covered. But none
of them focus on the agents ability to
acquire that knowledge. And accordingly,
current frontier models almost entirely
lack the ability to continually learn.
Yes, you can train them once, but after
that, their ability to acquire new
knowledge is severely limited. And that
that's a big problem. I doubt everyone
watching will be sold on my argument
from this alone. There are in fact a
number of viable counterarguments to my
view. You could bring up the point that
current frontier models do actually
learn via incontext learning. In
following that, you could say that
benchmarks that require incontext
learning actually do test the
acquisition of knowledge. And there are
several other arguments that do have
some truth to them. And don't worry, I
will absolutely address those arguments.
But first, I want to sell you on my
vision of the future of AI and research
in the field. Because my view is quite
different from the popular view and
understanding why I put such an emphasis
on learning and why I think the rest of
the field should too requires first
developing a shared idea of what AGI
should be. A definition that hopefully
you and I can agree on. How we ought to
define it and what it will look like
once we have it. And then once we've
gotten through that vision of the
future, then we'll talk about the
problems with the way things are done
right now and the three key things that
I think need to change to get to that
goal. I myself work on AI research. And
so to start, let me talk about the
mindset I adopt when I work on my own
research because when I work on my
research, I don't think about how I can
collect enough data and I don't think
about how I can make an agent big enough
to know everything. That's simply not
possible. There is an infinite amount of
knowledge out there and no agent can
know it all. Instead, I think about how
I can make an agent that can learn from
anything. An agent that has goals and
can autonomously control its data stream
and teach itself based on those goals.
And I find this to be a much more
compelling but also much harder problem
because sure AI can learn pretty much
anything given millions of examples. But
if it needs millions of examples to
learn, well then it can't learn
anything. It can only learn things for
which millions of examples exist. When I
work on my research, I imagine creating
an agent that I can teach just like I
would a human. That means learning from
a back and forth interaction rather than
learning from millions of pre-generated
examples. And I would also expect such
an agent to be able to bootstrap that
knowledge to continually learn on its
own. It should be able to continue to
learn autonomously even without a direct
need for human intervention. And I can
give you real examples from my own life,
not just hypotheticals. When I ask
Chachi PT for help writing a YouTube
script or for YouTube video ideas, they
are always awful because they don't fit
with my personal style. I mean, look at
these recommendations it's generating.
AI that can write a best-selling book in
24 hours. Let's try it. Creating an AI
that can predict your dream job with
your personality. I mean, these ideas
are incredibly bland and perhaps even
worse, they certainly wouldn't fit in
with the style of my channel. When I see
these sorts of failure cases, I want to
be able to work with the AI, suggest
changes, and have it learn so that next
time it's able to give suggestions that
are better and perhaps more in line with
the types of content that I make now.
And when I try to have AI write code in
my favorite machine learning library,
Equinox, it never gets it right because
apparently 2,000 stars on GitHub is just
not popular enough for sufficient
training data to exist. So, we're in
this weird spot where AI can do these
crazy things. It can ace PhD level
exams, discover new drugs. It can even
decode conversations between whales.
Yeah, that's a pretty cool story if you
didn't hear about that one. Uh yet, it
can't even learn the simplest of new
concepts without at least hundreds, if
not many thousands of examples and an
incredibly expensive training process.
That's the current state of AI. And
we've come to this point because the
north star of the field, the most
prominent notion of AGI is this idea of
the single all- knowing agent that has
seen so much data that it can generalize
to anything. That's unrealistic. And
that view fails to incorporate the
importance of learning. Interestingly
enough, the field was not always this
way. And you can find examples of
continual reinforcement learning with a
real focus on learning all the way back
to as early as the 1930s with Thomas
Ross' thinking machine and Steven
Smith's robotic rat that can learn to
navigate mazes. There are a lot more of
these neat examples in an awesome talk
by Andy Barto I'll link in the
description, but I think you get the
point. Early AI was mostly about
animallike continual learning systems.
And I can only imagine that that was
because it was well acknowledged that
intelligence is fundamentally about the
ability to learn.
Now, all of this is not to say that
modern AI does not learn, because it
absolutely does. It's to say that
instead of having these separate phases
for training, fine-tuning, RHF, testing,
and finally deployment, after which the
weights will probably never change
again, there should instead be a single
phase where the agent is both learning
and doing. So while modern AI has gotten
more general in the sense that one agent
can do many tasks from things like
making recipes to writing code with the
current popular direction of research
we'll never have an agent that can learn
any task and that is a big difference.
So let's say that you're interested in
this alternative version of AGI that
I've proposed a general purpose learning
algorithm inspired by animal learning
and animals of course includes humans.
How could we get there? I'd say that
there are three areas of research we
need to focus on that are often shied
away from in popular discourse. Three
things we can't yet do well enough to
get to that goalpost. The first one is
something I've already told you about.
It's continue learning. And this just
means that the agent should never stop
learning. Now, this one's pretty obvious
given our definition because if an agent
isn't always learning, then it can't
learn to do any task. And so, it very
clearly wouldn't meet our criteria for
AGI. I do usually still get some push
back on this point though and it's
usually from people that claim that
current LLMs like Chhat GPT or Gemini do
already learn and they usually point to
either fine-tuning which is where you
can train a model on a new task after
its initial training phase and in
context learning where you can give a
model an example of something it hasn't
seen before say examples of how to use a
specific programming library and then it
can use to learn what it has within its
context. And this point is actually
correct. Despite what I said, there
actually are ways for an agent to
continue to learn after its initial
training phase. But there are some big
caveats. Starting with fine-tuning,
fine-tuning is generally thought of
something you only do once, not a
continual process because, well, then
you just call it continue learning. And
if you do try to fine-tune the same
model multiple times, you often run into
several problems like the model
forgetting what it previously knew,
which is referred to as catastrophic
forgetting, where the model slowly
losing its ability to learn over time,
which is referred to as a loss of
plasticity. There are ways to mitigate
these sorts of problems, but there is
more work to be done. The point on in
context learning is certainly more
nuanced, and I have a whole video
talking about why in context learning is
insufficient for my version of AGI. So,
I'll link that here if you want to know
more about that. But the gist of the
point is that keeping the model's
parameters frozen limits the types of
patterns that are learnable with in
context learning. And anything a model
does learn in context is only learned
temporarily until that information exits
the context window. So that is point
number one. We still have a ways to go
when it comes to continue learning, but
it really is just the start. It also
brings us to point number two which
really goes handinhand with continue
learning and it is the ability to learn
from a single experiential stream of
data which I should say is the exact
opposite of how current large language
models are trained. When you want to
train an LM for example you randomly
sample from billions of disjointed
segments of text things like passages
from books articles research papers
transcripts from YouTube videos and the
like. and you feed these disjointed
sequences of text to the LM in enormous
batches to train. But there's a problem
with this. If a model only ever learns
from disjointed sequences, it will never
gain the ability to reason about how it
should act over much longer time
horizons, about how it should act over a
lifetime of experiences. While the
severity of this problem is not as
immediately obvious as it is for a lack
of continued learning, an example goes a
long way here. So, I'll give you an
example directly relevant to this video
and my own research. Think about how
this video came to be and how I came to
care so much about this topic. I promise
it was not because I asked Chatbt for
the top 10 video ideas for AI YouTube
channels. I mean, look at these ideas.
You saw these ideas earlier. They're
grossly generic. In contrast, you're
probably not going to find a surplus of
videos on YouTube, if any, about the
importance of continually learning from
a single stream of experience. And
that's because I myself have had a
unique single stream of experiences that
led me here that no one else has had. I
started with an interest in self-study
and reinforcement learning that led me
to a graduate program where the
community was acutely aware of the need
for continual learning. I worked on
research in the area. I had all sorts of
interesting conversations with people
who thought about this in extreme depth
and I even tried to start a startup that
failed because of a lack of existing
continue learning methods. So when I go
to work on my new research or to make a
new video, I'm informed by everything
that's happened in my past, by what I've
learned, and by the specific events
recorded in my episodic memory. Without
experiencing the world through a
continual stream of observations, like
we humans do, concepts like episodic
memory and temporally correlated
causality become meaningless. And to
create something like this video or the
type of niche research I do becomes
impossible. At some point, if you want
an agent to be able to deal with
lifelong sequences of data, it's going
to need to learn from lifelong sequences
of data. And the only way to get those
is for the agent itself to interact with
the world, and generate those
experiences. And no matter how hard you
think, I really don't think there's any
way to get around this. You can't just
strap sensors to someone, stick a camera
on their forehead, and have them run
around for 10 years like that. I mean,
it would be hilarious, but it still
wouldn't be the same. So, that's point
number two. You need a continual single
stream of experiences. And with that, we
finally arrive at the last point, the
last blind spot we need to turn our
attention to, and that is scaling with
compute, or more specifically, designing
algorithms where more compute always
leads to better performance. Now, you
might be thinking, haven't we already
figured this out? And the answer would
be yes. We've figured out how to scale
models to hundreds of billions or even
trillions of parameters when we use
giant batches of data sampled randomly
from massive internet scale data sets.
But when we go to the continual single
stream experiential learning setting, we
absolutely have not figured it out. Do
you know what happens if you try to
train one of these massive models
without a massive static data set or
when you stop using these massive
batches of data? Our current learning
methods completely fail because they've
been designed with a big data mindset
from the ground up. And you might be
surprised by how much those design
choices impact the ability of these
algorithms to work on continue learning
settings. The methods of scaling that
exist today are not methods that scale
with just compute. They're methods that
only scale with a combination of compute
and data. And they are grossly
inefficient when it comes to how they
scale with data. So much so that you may
have recently heard about insiders at
tech companies talking about how LLM
training has been recently running into
data problems. I mean, think about it.
After going through basically the
entirety of the open internet and then
also their private data sets, they say
that they're running into data problems.
Yet, a human could go their whole life
only occasionally browsing the internet
or maybe never browsing the internet and
still be incredibly smart. It's clearly
not a data problem. It's a problem with
the approach. What we need are not
methods that can gobble up more data,
but methods that when given more compute
can use that compute to extract more out
of what they're experiencing moment to
moment. And while we still have a long
ways to go on this front, we have made
some great progress in the past few
years. And there are a lot of
interesting ways to do this from
modelbased RL to auxiliary tasks for
representation learning to learning
options and more. This idea of being
able to scale with compute in the
continual RL setting is actually my own
research area of focus. And later this
year, I'll be starting my PhD to
continue working on just that. I want to
make another video soon diving into all
the ways that scaling with compute is
possible and talk more about my own new
research. If that sounds interesting to
you, you should totally subscribe. I try
to only post when I have something
genuinely interesting to share. And if
you're interested in this area of
research, you might also be interested
in this video where I summarize 2 years
of my own research in just over 10
minutes. Or you can follow me on X for
infrequent hot takes. And that is it.
Thank you for watching.